So, far we have been focusing on questions where all the forces are either horizontal
or they are vertical upward downward right, but many times what happens is that forces
are obviously are at an angle. So, we need to know what to do in such a case. So, for
example, if I had a block and it has a force that is acting this way. Now, how do I deal
with such a force ok. So, standard approach is to convert everything to a combination
of horizontal and vertical forces. So, we will say that this force is actually so much
horizontal and so much vertical. You can always break up a force that is like this into a
horizontal component and a vertical component. This thing we call i cap. So, this direction
you know we call it i cap direction. This direction we call it j cap direction. So,
what does that mean? That means if I have 3 units like this i cap is 1 unit. So, if
I have 3 units like this it is i cap plus i cap plus i cap we will write it as 3 i cap.
What does that mean? The length is 3 ok i cap has length 1. Now, if in this direction
I have a force which is 4 units long I would not say 4 i cap I will say 4 j cap and then
this force which is actually this force plus that force. Now, this plus is not the usual
plus it is not 3 plus 4 it is 3 like this plus 4 like this. So, for example, if I go
3 units horizontally and I go 4 units vertically have I gone 7 units? No right I walked 7 units
but my displacement would actually be this much. Now, how much is this Pythagoras theorem
tells us that a square plus b square is c square. So, this is root of 3 square plus
4 square. Now, that is 9 plus 16 25. So, root of 25 is 5, but this is not length 5 this
is a vector it is in a direction. So, this is not the best way to write it what I will
do is I will say that this vector f usually we will put an arrow on top is just simply
3 i cap plus 4 j cap Newtons if this was in Newtons it is 3 i cap plus 4 j cap Newtons.
This is the answer not this that is not the answer, but magnitude of f you do not want to
know what is the value of f, but you want to know the magnitude of f which means we
only want the length then we can say that is equal to root of 3 square plus 4 square
which is 5, but the force is not this force is 3 i cap plus 4 j cap. Suppose I had a force
which was like this force which I have broken it up like that. So, suppose this was 6 i
cap and this was well now let us think if it was upward I would be calling it j cap.
Now, it is downward. So, I will be calling it minus j cap, but usually we put the minus
in front. So, let us say minus 5 j cap what is this force it is just simply 6 i cap minus
5 j cap that is it over. Now, suppose I ask you let us add this force
plus this force is that easy. Suppose this was 2 units 2 Newtons and this was 3 Newtons
what is the total force 5 Newtons this is easy. Suppose I had 2 Newtons and I had to
add like this 6 Newtons what is the total force 2 minus 6. So, minus 4. So, here we
will say it is minus 4 Newtons why because you see 2 this way and 6 that way this is
going to be my resultant force minus 4 Newtons if I assume this to be the positive direction
but it is 4 Newtons in this direction. Now, these are all easy we have already seen what
to do if it is perpendicular. Suppose I ask you what about this force plus some force
like this this force it is not even perpendicular that is the resultant force is this but how
do I add this force and that force tough. But if somebody gave me this force in this
form suppose they say this is 7 Newtons making an angle of something 40 degrees with this
very difficult but instead of doing this suppose they had given it like this they had said
I have here a force which is let us say 4 i cap plus 3 j cap another force like this
let us say 2 i cap minus 1 j cap ok. So, this is a little longer and that is a little shorter
now what is this force just add these two straight away 4 i cap plus 2 i cap how much
is that 6 i cap 3 j cap minus j cap how much is that plus 2 j cap that is it over.
Now suppose you want the length of this you want the length not the force. So, the force
is this but what is the length of this force we will write that just as f without the arrow
what is the length of this force very simple root of this square plus that square root of
6 square plus 2 square we can calculate it but that is the basic idea why is that the
case because 6 i cap plus 2 j cap means this is 6 i cap and that is 2 j cap what is this
length 6 what is that length 2. So, what is this length Pythagoras theorem says root
of 6 square plus 2 square and that is what I have written ok.
So, once you write the force in the form of i and j the question becomes extremely easy
in need usually you get 1 or 2 questions where the question itself is given in i and j form
but then sometimes the question is not given in i and j form. So, then means you need to
convert it into i and j form. So, first let us start looking at what to do if the question
is given in i and j form. So, now let us look at questions where we are looking at all objects
only in space after that we will worry about objects on the ground. Now what happens when
you have objects in space you do not have to worry about gravitational force. So, they
are all hanging in space just for easy calculation. Now if I have this 5 kg block in space with
3 forces acting on it what is its acceleration. Now in all questions I am really asking you
to find acceleration.
So, let us think about it 6 plus 8 how much is that 14 minus 4 so that is 10. So, acceleration
is 10 divided by 5 2 meters per second square in that direction correct. Now this we have
done earlier. So, really this is quite easy I will write this now as acceleration is 2
i cap meters per second square. If I write it this way I do not have to say that way
do you understand because this is already i cap. So, that is the reason we introduce
this question.
Now let us think about the other questions. So, suppose I take this question but in this
question there is one force like this one like this and one like that I want the acceleration
but acceleration is a vector and it is net force by mass. What is net force here? Let
us see this is 4 i cap plus 6 j cap what about this one 7 i cap it is not given but you know
it is horizontal and it is that way. So, it is 7 i cap what about this one minus 2 i cap
plus 4 j cap how do you find how do you add all this up add all i caps together minus 2
i cap plus 4 i cap which is 2 i cap plus 7 i cap which is 9 i cap 4 j cap plus 6 j cap
10 j cap divided by 2 which means the acceleration is 4.5 i cap plus 5 j cap meters per second
square.
Now 4.5 i cap plus 5 j cap will look like this direction. So, this is the acceleration
direction now is this the magnitude of acceleration or is this the direction plus magnitude of
acceleration both right this includes direction it also has everything in it. So, this is
the full acceleration suppose somebody asks us I do not want a but I want magnitude of
a then you say root of 4.5 square plus 5 square every time you do not need to draw the right
angle triangle you can directly say that if it is x i cap plus y j cap it is x square
plus y square root of that that will be the magnitude. So, is that clear? So, if I am
given a force like this it is very easy to add these forces and come up with one single
force therefore, you can find the acceleration is that clear now that is because I have given
the format i and j that is very important if you do not get that format convert it into
that format ok. Sometimes what happens is this is the easier one people look at this
I do not know what to do but I hope that is very clear you know what to do with this now
let us take a slightly more complex question ok. So, I am going to look at this question.
So, if I look at this question then in this question I have a force F how much I do not
know but I have another force horizontal direction what should I write this 10 i cap this is
already given as minus 5 i cap minus 5 j cap minus 5 i cap minus 5 j cap that is why
it is pointing in the downward direction like that. Now, if I look at the acceleration
of this 3 kg block that is given do you remember Newton's second law what is it? Net force
is mass into acceleration now this force is some angle I do not know what angle let us
write this as F vector net force is this force plus this force plus this force.
So, if I write it here I will write F plus 10 i cap minus 5 i cap minus 5 j cap this
is the total right this must be equal to mass into acceleration. So, 3 times 2 i cap plus
3 j cap if you remember earlier I told you first write ma but that was because you were
not using i and j with i and j the direction is already there. So, whether you write this
first or whether you write that first does not matter.
So, if you use vectors it is very straightforward and simple. So, F if I solve this is 6 i cap
that is 10 i cap this is 10 minus 5 how much is this 5 i cap. So, when you bring 5 i cap
here 6 minus 5 1 so, this is going to be 1 i cap this is 9 j cap that is minus 5 j cap
so, when it comes here it will become plus 5 9 plus 5 14. So, that means the force unknown
force here we found is i cap plus 14 j cap it is a very large force if you want its magnitude
what will it be root of 1 square because it is i cap means 1 i cap plus 14 square. So,
that will be the magnitude of this force ok. So, I hope you know how to find this if acceleration
is given you can find the unknown force.
Now, let us look at this case here the actual acceleration was given now let us let me explain
what this question is like. So, you have a 3 k g block you have 1 force minus 5 i cap
plus 3 j cap another force do not know F a third force which is 3 i cap plus 6 j cap
newtons in that direction I have been told that this block this object is moving vertically
up no horizontal motion no horizontal acceleration means what net force in the horizontal direction
must be 0 ok. So, let us think about it this is only j cap i cap is 0 only j cap ok. So,
for example, this was one of the questions that came up in need one of similar kind of
question came up where what is given is you want this force such that it is only going
to go vertically. So, what is what are you going to conclude this i cap plus that i cap
plus this is also i cap ok this plus this plus this must become what 0 because i cap
force is 0 ok. So, how much is my net i cap force. So, I will write i cap how much is the
i cap force F plus 3 minus 5 must be 0. So, what does that mean F minus 2 is 0. So, F must
be equal to 2 newtons. So, have I found out what is this force 2 newtons in the i cap
direction now suppose they ask you what is this acceleration find this acceleration well
this force plus this force plus this force became 0 what is remaining this plus this.
So, how much is the net force 9 j cap newtons. So, F net is 9 j cap newtons what happened
to i cap became 0 cancelled out, but if it is 9 j cap net force by mass will be the acceleration
net force is 9 mass is 3. So, net force by mass 3. So, acceleration is F net by mass
and so that is going to give me 9 divided by 3. So, it is going to be 3 j cap units
meters per second square understood. So, this way what I have done is that we can find both
the force as well as the acceleration, but notice acceleration was not given in the beginning
what was given is that it is going to be vertical that was that is all that was given. So, is
that clear how to apply something like this if the force is given in terms of i and j
you should be able to combine it like this and solve.
Now, what if the force is not given as i and j what do I do well you resolve. So, let us
learn how to do that many times we will be given forces that are inclined at some angle
let us say that this was a force F and it makes some angle theta with the horizontal.
Now, this is not given in the form of i and j i cap j cap. So, we will convert it how
much i cap this much i cap plus this much j cap, but what is this much how do I know
what is this much. So, let us say it was x i cap y j cap, but you know that this length
is F this length is x and this length is y. Then y by F what is y by F it is the opposite
side of this right angle triangle by the hypotenuse what is opposite by hypotenuse sin theta.
So, this is sin of this angle opposite by hypotenuse. So, what is y F sin theta. So,
I will write this as F sin theta j cap and then x by F x by F is cos theta. So, that
means x is F cos theta. So, instead of writing it as x i cap I will write it as F cos theta
i cap. In fact, you should do this all the time automatically you look at this force
and then you immediately say what is this component we call this the component F theta
F cos theta other side F sin theta always F cos theta is easy F cos theta F sin theta
is that okay. So, F you can rewrite. So, suppose I want to rewrite F I will write it like this
okay. So, F you can write it as F cos theta i cap F cos theta i cap what is this F just
the magnitude it is just the size okay F cos theta i cap makes it with direction plus
F sin theta j cap. Now that means I need to remember cos theta sin theta various values
for it I will given you a list here you know this already most of you probably know for
angle 0, 30, 45, 60 and 90 you know sin 0 is 0 sin 30 is half okay sin 45 is 1 by root
2 sin 60 is root 3 by 2 and sin 90 is 1 okay. Now if you do not remember you should definitely
memorize this because this is going to come up everywhere.
Two important extra information sin 37 is almost 3 by 5 okay. So, now if you look at
this triangle 3, 4, 5 you remember this triangle right. Now if you take this triangle this
angle is almost 37 degrees exactly you should look at it it will be some 36.9 something
slightly less than 37 but we will call it 37 degrees many questions we will say angle
is 37 sin 37 3 by 5 cos 37 4 by 5 and then if you look at this angle this angle is 53
degrees. So, sin 53 4 by 5 cos 53 3 by 5 just remember this is a very important value to
just keep in mind. So, many questions we will say 37 degrees advantages sin 37 3 by 5 rational
number integers again there 4 by 5 integers whereas if you take sin 60 root 3 is difficult
to play with cos 60 is very nice but sin 60 is not okay.
Let us take an example. So, for example suppose I had 20 Newton force making an angle of 60
degrees write this force as a vector. So, if I write this force as a vector how much is
this 20 cos 60. So, 20 cos 60 look at cos 60 cos 60 is half which means 10 like this
and then what about this 20 sin 60 sin 60 is root 3 by 2. So, 10 root 3 therefore if
I call this force F what is F 10 i cap plus 10 root 3 j cap Newton's why is this useful
because if I now have a question where there is one force like this one force like this
one force like this and I want to add you will see that this becomes extremely useful
okay. Now, if this was not 60 but it was 53 degrees then I will use sin 53 4 by 5 okay.
So, cos 53 4 for first for this one 3 by 5 and sin 63 for that which is 4 by 5 okay.
You will see that there would not be a root 3 there will just be a 4 by 5 which makes
it easy for calculation okay. Otherwise you should know what to do with that root 3 as
well. So, let us do one question where we have multiple forces and we want to find the
acceleration. So, now let us look at this question. So, in this question there is a
4 kg block in space assume this whole thing is in space what is the difference if it was
not in space then I am going to have to worry about gravitational force which I am not drawing
here okay. So, it is in space now there is one force which is minus 3 i plus 7 j Newton
then there is one which is 4 Newton upward you can always add the j and say this is 4
j cap Newtons okay. Why is this minus because it is this way minus 3 i cap plus 7 because
it is upward. So, this way this way now that force I do not know in the i j form okay but
I know it is 10 Newton magnitude at an angle of 30 degrees and then there is a 3 i cap
because it is a horizontal force. What is the acceleration of the 4 kg block? So, that
is the question how will we go about it we will need to find the net force and then divide
by the mass. So, net force by mass what is the mass 4 kg. So, this is easy what is the
problem net force that is the problem. So, if I want this acceleration I need to find
net force this is easy to add this is easy to add this is easy to add what is the problem
that fellow is the problem why because it is some weird angle what do I do I will rewrite
this in the form of i and j how much i 10 cos 30 10.
So, let us write here 10 cos 30 what is cos 30 I will write cos 30 but you should be able
to calculate cos 30 is equal to root 3 by 2 you can see there it is root 3 by 2 now what
happens if you forget bad luck you need to remember these values ok this is going to
come up 100 times well 1000 times you will find this everywhere you should memorize this
entire set and you should not take time to come up with it you say cos 30 tau all root
3 by 2. So, 10 times root 3 by 2 10 root 3 by 2 is how much 5 root 3 Newtons ok, but
then there is also this component how much is this component 10 cos 30 10 sin 30. So,
10 sin 30 is how much half this is cos 30 that is automatically sin 30 ok. So, how much
is this 10 into half is 5 Newtons. So, this force you can rewrite this force as 5 root
3 i cap plus because it is pointing up if this force was pointing down it will be minus
5 j cap, but this is going up. So, therefore, it is plus 5 j cap Newtons now can you add
up all the vectors you can write. So, let us quickly add minus 3 i cap my. So, let me
do all this minus 3 i cap I do not need to add this do I need to add that yes plus 3
i cap. So, this is done this is done plus 5 root 3 i cap this is also done now j cap
what is the j cap. So, plus so let me actually write the j cap down here ok. So, plus so
much j cap what j cap 7 j cap 4 j cap anything else done done done done done right this part
but that is not yet done. So, plus 5 j cap divided by 4 k g this many Newtons by so
many k g's this is going to give me meters per second square si units. Acceleration of
the 4 k g block vector vector acceleration minus 3 plus 3 cancels 5 root 3 divided by
4. So, 5 root 3 by 4 i cap and what is this 5 plus 7 7 plus 5 12 12 plus 4 16 16 divided
by 4 4. So, 4 j cap meters per second square this is the vector but suppose they ask you
look at the direction this is something i cap something j cap it is going in that direction
this is a messy question but you got an easy answer suppose somebody says no I do not want
this I want a magnitude which means we write it like this just a no arrow on top.
What is the answer root of this square plus that square what is this square 5 square will
be 25 4 square 16 root of 3 whole square will basically give me 3 plus 4 square which is
16 you can take this there simplify 75 plus 15 16 is going to be something right 256 you
can add it then you can take the square root but you will get some number weird number and
that is the answer. So, much meters per second square obviously you need to simplify I am
not doing that. So, is that clear to everybody you understood how to solve this problem because
what is important here is that you resolve this force.
Now, this was given in i and j suppose this was also given with an angle you will resolve
suppose instead of giving you this angle or this angle this angle was given then you will
say this force cos will be that because this angle can also be theta then you will say
f cos theta will be that component f sin theta will be this component you have to be bit
careful then cos theta j cap sin theta will give you minus i cap because it is pointing
in that direction luckily we do not have this in this question but we may have now unfortunately
all the questions we were doing are all in space I did not have to count gravity I did
not have to worry about a floor now sometimes all of that will matter.
So, let us take a couple of questions where you have forces acting at angles but you have
it with on the surface of the earth that means there is imagine a big box I place it on a
table and I am pulling like this my force is at an angle but the block is probably going
to move horizontally it may also move up but it may move horizontally. So, let us look
at a question like that.